In parameterized tests,
arguments can be provided by sources that you can use via annotations.
There are three rules when using argument sources.
For every test method, you can use as many as you want,
but you should have at least one source.
Otherwise, the test will not be executed.
Each source must provide arguments for all test method parameters.
You cannot have, for example,
one source to provide values for the first parameter and another source to
provide values for the second parameter of the method,
and the test will be executed once for each group of arguments.
Now let's review the source annotations JUnit provides.
You have already seen ValueSource in action.
It allows you to define an array of type string,
class, or primitive types like int or boolean.
And it can be used only on test methods that have a single parameter.
Then we have EnumSource that you can use to run a
test with the values of an enum.
It takes, as an optional parameter,
the names of the enum values you want to include or exclude
depending on the value of the mode parameter.
And like ValueSource, it can be used only on single parameter methods.
Then we have MethodSource.
With this annotation,
we can specify the name of one or more methods that will
provide the arguments for the test.
For single parameter tests,
these methods can return a stream of the parameter
type or a stream of primitive types.
For a test with multiple parameters, the methods can return a stream, iterable,
iterator, or an array with elements of type arguments,
which is a simple interface for wrapping an array of objects.
The methods used by MethodSource must be static unless you're using a
PER_CLASS lifecycle and they can reside in an external class.
You just have to provide its fully qualified name.
Next, we have CsvSource.
With this annotation,
you can declare the arguments as a comma‑separated list of strings.
It can take, as an attribute,
either the delimiter character or a delimiterString, and
single quotes are used as quote characters.
However, for a big number of arguments, this may not be the best option.
So there's also a CsvFileSource annotation that takes one or more CSV
files from the classpath or local file system. The attributes this
annotation takes include files to specify files from the file system,
resources for files from the classpath, attributes for the file's
encoding, the lineSeparator, and the delimiter, either as a character
or a string.
The default delimiter is a comma.
Each line of the file results in a test invocation. Lines
beginning with a hash or number symbol will be interpreted as a
comment and will be ignored, and this annotation uses a double
quote as the quote character.
There are also annotations for null and empty sources.
NullSource provides a null argument. For this reason, it
cannot be used for primitive type arguments.
EmptySource provides an empty value for parameters of type string,
list, set, map, and primitive or object arrays. And NullAndEmptySource, which
combines the functionality of NullSource and EmptySource.
Finally, the annotation ArgumentsSource allows you to use your own sources.
You just have to specify an implementation of the ArgumentsProvider interface.
This interface has the method providesArguments, which returns a
stream of elements of type Arguments and takes an object of type
ExtensionContext that gives you a lot of information about the
context of the test.
All right, let's see an example of some of these source annotations.
You have already seen an example of the ValueSource annotation.
So let me paste another method to show you how to use the EnumSource
annotation. Here I'm using SpecialProductsEnum, which contains the five
products included in the sample order I'm using along with their product ID.
Back to our method. When I run the test, you can see how the method discount
should be applied. EnumSource was executed with the values of
SpecialProductsEnum. EnumSource also takes a name attribute to specify the
values of the enum we want to inject in the test. For example, let's include
only BIG_LATTE and BIG_TEA. There you have it. Only these tests were
executed.
Now let's review the MethodSource annotation. With this annotation, you have to
specify the name of the method that is going to provide the arguments for the
test method, in this case productIds. This method can be private, but it must
be static so it can be called properly.
If I run the test, you can see that the method was executed five times.
However, MethodSource can also provide the value of multiple parameters.
Let me paste another method.
This time, we have a test method that takes two parameters,
the productId and the customerPoints.
So the method productIdsCustomerPoints returns a stream of Arguments
objects. Arguments is an interface that contains the static method of,
which takes a variable number of parameters.
In this case,
I'm just passing the productId, and 100 times the productId as the
customerPoints. Let's run the class one more time.
Great. Here you can see the values of the arguments provided by the method.
Now instead of having the arguments here in the class,
we can use the annotation CsvFileSource to have them in an external file.
In this case, I'm using the file product‑point‑data.csv at the
root of the classpath. Here, let me show you. As you can see, it
contains three groups of values.
Back to our Test class, let's run it.
Great.
We have three invocations with their arguments specified in the file.
Finally, if none of these annotations fills your needs,
you can create your own source with the annotation ArgumentsSource.
You just have to specify the class of your custom source,
in this case ProductIdArgumentsProvider.
This class implements the interface ArgumentsProvider with the method
provideArguments that returns a stream of arguments. Here, I just copied
the implementation of the MethodSource that provides values for the
productId and customerPoints parameters.
But in theory,
you could get the parameters from anywhere you want and
format them to return a stream of arguments. So when I run the test, there are five tests as expected.